This study, based the credit risk dataset collected from Kaggle, aims to predict default risk by analyzing borrowers and profile borrowers to enhance the efficiency of lending decisions. Machine learning models, including CART, Random Forest, Logistic Regression, and XGBoost, are employed to classify and predict loan status. Additionally, K-means clustering is applied to analyze the characteristics of users with different loan statuses, helping to profile user segments.
Firstly, this study finds that XGBoost model beat Logistic Regression, CART and Random Forest in the field of classification accuracy evaluation. XGBoost model demonstrates superior performance in both the training and testing sets and achieves accuracy rates of 0.9461 and 0.8713, with F1-scores of 0.9460 and 0.8708, respectively. In contrast, CART and Random Forest models exhibit high precision in the training set, but their recall rates are relatively low. The Logistic Regression model performs the weakest across all metrics, particularly in recall, which is only 0.7679.
Secondly, in the feature importance analysis section, financial factors(including percentage of income represented by the loan amount and individual’s income) and low attributes(including grade assigned to loans, interest rate and intention of loan application) significantly impact the prediction of loan status across all models, while stability and background attributes(including type of home ownership,employment length and age), historical credit attributes(including length of credit history, historical default record) follow behind. And percentage of income represented by the loan amount is the most significant feature compared with other financial factors, especially in the XGBoost model.
Thirdly, the study conducts a clustering analysis of customer groups, categorizing them into four clusters ranked from high to low default risk as Cluster 1, Cluster 2, Cluster 3, and Cluster 4. The study finds that customer groups with higher income, lower loan-to-income ratios, and lower interest rates generally exhibit lower default rates.
Overall, the XGBoost model excels at identifying borrower default risk, and K-means clustering can identify the characteristics of different borrower groups. This paper provides empirical support for financial institutions in selecting risk models to predict default risk and in formulating risk management strategies tailored to different groups. 
